---
layout: post
title: "Project LaCogito"
subtitle: ""
date: 2023-03-12
author: "Jamin Chen"
header-img: "img/post-bg-universe.jpg"
tags: ["Neuro-symbolic", "Cognitive Computing", "Wolfram", "OpenCog"]
---

# Introduction

There are many reasons and motivations for me to initiate this new project
LambdaCogito (or LaCogito). The primary part is that I was frustrated by small
and even-no progress of knowledge retrieval technology in near a decade. Yes,
here I mean someone like Google and Baidu. Recently, ChatGPT and the its flashy
integration with Bing give a shot in the arm to shake the basis of the sleeping
search engine giant. OpenAI shows the capability of Large Language Mode (LLM)
with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) in modeling us
accumulated knowledge in a probabilistic way (specifically Neural Networks).
About twelve years ago, Wolfram Alpha had shown the potential to make the same
thing, rather in a symbolic and computing way different from ChatGPT. There
still is a discussion for a final paradigm of either the probabilistic or the
symbolic. Let the bullets fly for a while.

Meanwhile, a new paradigm of neural-symbolic routine is attracting more
researches recent years. This is where our story starts. From a higher vintage
point, maybe either probabilistic or symbolic paradigm is just a unilateral
approximation or simulation of a single functionality of the natural brain
mechanisms. They are not contradictory but supportive. Maybe there is still
other undiscovered *supportive* mechanisms towards a real Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI). Upon above reasons, the Project LaCogito involves the
neural-symbolic fusion as one of its core designing principles.

Another important question we have to answer ahead is this project's first big
milestone as our success target. AGI is an attractive but fuzzy direction for
an engineering software system. We would lost our direction at current stage if
we target at AGI by now. We would absorb inspiring ideas and concrete
achievements in related domains such as neural science, cognitive science, AGI
theories and more. Project LaCogito's primary target is to construct an
extendable infrastructure of cognitive computing, which includes a new kind of
language *Kollider* easy to use, a unified internal representation of knowledge
and program, a distributed neural-symbolic knowledge storage, and a GÃ¶del
Machine inspired execution engine of the unified program representation. All of
these components will be formulated in detail in following articles.

# Inspiring Works

The LaCogito project was inspired by multiple awesome existing projects. One of
them is Wolfram Language (WL) as well as its commercial cloud service of
Wolfram Alpha. WL is a generic knowledge computing language constructed on a
solid success of Mathematica for nearly thirty years in scientific computing
over multiple disciplines. Mathematica originated from the blossom of
meta/M-expression language paradigm and evolved into an advanced algebra
calculus and symbolic reasoning engine. Its scale computing capability is
enhanced by the GridMathematica technology. Symbolic language has the nature of
representation flexibility in the sense that WL could represent all objects and
knowledge in a unified model, which is the foundation towards a general
knowledge computing engine. Due to the commercial limitation of WL, we know
less about the inner implementation of the real computing process under the
hood.

Another vital inspiring project is [OpenCog](https://opencog.org/) and its
inheritor [OpenCog Hyperon](https://wiki.opencog.org/w/Hyperon) as proposed by
Dr. Ben Goertzel. OpenCog targets at a open framework of AGI whose fundamental
ideas lay in Dr. Goertzel's book "*Engineering General Intelligence*". Project
LaCogito and OpenCog Hyperon share a few designing disciplines such as
hypergraph-modeled knowledge base, distributed knowledge storage. OpenCog has a
high-level language called  Atomese whose V1 is a bunch of scripts in different
languages to handle Atom objects in Atomspace storage. The successive Atomese 2
proposed in Hyperon is designed with a core of generic gradual-typing based
Atom and Atom-type-system framework. As still under design, Atomese 2
illustrates the potential of exploring dependent type, gradual typing, user
pluggable type system. These aspects still remain under active researches. In
the *Kollider* Language towards a native cognitive computing language, we would
as well involve and practice some of these novel features.

There are many other outstanding projects and researches that inspire us. They
are [Cyc](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyc), Dr. Saba's
[ONTOLOGIK](https://ontologik.medium.com/), and many excellent researches on
cognitive architectures such as [Global Workspace
Theory](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/10.1142/S1793843009000050) (GWT),
[Conscious Turing Machine](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2115934119)
(CTM), [ACT-R](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACT-R) and so on. The core design
ideas of these inspiring works would be discussed in following related topics.

# Next In Coming

I would write a series of articles on the core design of each LaCogito's
component. These topics remain open for public discussion. One of Project
LaCogito's goals is becoming a community-driven cognitive computing framework.
The implementation part is hosted on Github community [LambdaCogito](https://github.com/lambdacogito). Welcome to join!

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>.

