I am a natural optimist, also a dreamer about something big. This big is
relative in the sense that its state is dynamic with the outside world or
sometimes with my own inside spiritual world. I am also an enthusiastic lover of
human technologies. Combining these both gives me a strong vision and
expectation of innovations. However, human technologies are enduring with a
small progress almost in every theoretical and industrial domain these decades.
This deepest depression against reality makes me to absorb inspiration from
sci-fi movies and writings. This is why
[StarTrek](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_Trek) becomes one of my
favorite episodes and movie series in the history, and also why I have to
explore some projects that would fulfill my own vision on the future.

#### Education

*   2010-2016: Shanghai Jiaotong Univ., Information and Communication
    Engineering, Ph.D.
*   2006-2010: Xidian Univ., Optical Information and Science Technology,
    Bachelor

#### Ph.D. Research

My Ph.D. research was on renewed models and characteristics of human mobility,
with advanced statistical techniques upon large-scale network traffic. There is
a large gap between observable behavioral patterns and digital bits that is
collected from raw network data like mobile geo-located application traffic.
Advanced analysis and modeling approaches are still in a shortage. This shortage
inspires my initial efforts on the work. My thesis was advised by Prof. [Yaohui
Jin](http://front.sjtu.edu.cn/~jinyh/) at [Shanghai Jiao Tong
Univ.](http://en.sjtu.edu.cn/). Now [the
thesis](https://github.com/caesar0301/phd-dissertation) is available for public
(in Chinese).

In the research, a by-product is the initialization of [awesome-public-data
community](https://github.com/awesomedata). During the early years of big data
(back to 2009 and 2010), it suffered a painful search for high-quality research
data. This urged me to start the data community and host a bunch of research
quality data. This community is still active since then. You can access [slack
channel](https://awesomedataworld.slack.com/) for latest discussion on data joy.

#### Industrial Experience

At the beginning of pursuing my Ph.D. degree, Big Data tendency was appearing
and this technology was climbing its Gartner Hyper Cycle at the Innovation
Trigger stage. Big data as preprocessing and data science were involved in my
daily research on human behavior pattern mining. I joined a big data startup,
Transwarp whose name comes from sci-fi novel Three Bodies, at Shanghai after my
graduation. And in there I spent more than three years to explore the technology
of combining big data stack with the appealing cloud-native Kubernetes ecosystem.

Afterwards in 2020, I joined the team of a native Cloud service provider to dig
deeply into the cloud native service for big data warehouse (as well as data
lake). From then I began to seriously think about the technologies under the
hood of Wolfram Alpha, as I was attracted and called on by its efficiency and
unification of multi-paradigm data representations. These features lay in the
core of a successful data-lake warehouse. When I realized that it was hard to
fulfill my experimental thoughts on a commercial product with a heavy tech debt,
the [LambdaCogito community](https://github.com/lambdacogito) was constructed to do
these proof of concepts (PoC).

With nearly seven years of industrial experience, I have learned a bunch of
skills required by the PoCs. From programming languages to arch design, there
still more knowledge and theories to learn to fill in the toolbox before having
my own team. It includes computer language theory, mathematical logic,
computational logic, artificial general intelligence theory, cognitive science
and more. This extensive learning also gives me an insight into the rapid
iteration of data technologies.

#### Life

Family is the treasure at the core of my heart. Without them, all the stories we create for ourselves would be swept away by the winds of time. The essence of who I am, along with my ambitious goals, is rooted in finding meaning amidst the aimlessness of life. This perspective isn't one of pessimism; rather, it is true optimism. I have a passion for Chinese calligraphy, maintaining an aquarium, traveling, reading, and reflecting. However, everything is better when shared with family.
